Schema update to support multi-organism data (#104)
chanzuckerberg/single-cell-curation: schema/2.0.0/corpora_schema.md

* **AnnData** - The canonical data format for the cellxgene Data Portal is HDF5-backed [AnnData](https://anndata.readthedocs.io/en/latest) as written by version 0.7 of the anndata library.  Part of the rationale for selecting this format is to allow cellxgene to access both the data and metadata within a single file. The schema requirements and definitions for the AnnData `X`, `obs`, `var`, `obsm`, and `uns` attributes are described below.

> * **Organisms**. Genes MUST be either from Human or Mouse. Multi-organism data is accepted as long as Human or Mouse orthologs are used.

Reviewer: How do we message the addition of SARS-CoV-2?

Reviewer 2: which begs the same question for other mouse/human infectious agents or microbiota

Perhaps a path is:
* host / primary organism must be human or mouse
* data may include mouse or human biota (is there a better term?), as long as there are no gene IDs that conflict with the pinned IDs

Reviewer: > host / primary organism must be human or mouse

This PR allows **all** organisms in the NCBITaxon - but, their genes in `var` must then be orthologous genes in the pinned ontologies.

Author: How about?

> Genes MUST be either from Human, Mouse, or SARS-CoV-2  for Human cells from COVID-19 donors. Multi-organism data is accepted as long as Human or Mouse orthologs are used.

Reviewer: _Data MUST be from an organism defined in the NCBI organismal classification. For data that is neither Human, Mouse, nor SARS-COV-2 for Human cells, orthologous genes from the pinned Human and Mouse gene annotations are REQUIRED._

### Required Gene Annotations

cellxgene requires ENSEMBL identifiers for genes and External RNA Controls Consortium (ERCC) identifiers for [RNA Spike-In Control Mixes] to ensure  that all datasets it stores measure the same features and can therefore be integrated.

The following gene annotation dependencies are *pinned* for this version of the schema. For multi-organism experiments, cells from any organism are allowed as long as orthologs from the following organism annotations are used.

| Source | Required version | Download |
|:--|:--|:--|
| [ENSEMBL (Human)] | Human reference GRCh38 (GENCODE v32/Ensembl 98)] matching [cellranger 2020-A (July 7, 2020) release] | [gencode.v32.primary_assembly.annotation.gtf] |
| [ENSEMBL (Mouse)] | Mouse reference mm10 (GENCODE vM23/Ensembl 98) matching [cellranger 2020-A (July 7, 2020) release]| [gencode.vM23.primary_assembly.annotation.gtf] |
| [ENSEMBL (COVID-19)] | SARS-CoV-2 reference (ENSEMBL assembly: ASM985889v3) | [Sars\_cov\_2.ASM985889v3.101.gtf] |

> | [ThermoFisher ERCC Spike-Ins] | ThermoFisher ERCC RNA Spike-In Control Mixes (Cat # 4456740, 4456739) | [cms_095047.txt] |

Reviewer: Is there a reason that we are not referencing/downloading the GTF available on this page - https://www.thermofisher.com/order/catalog/product/4456739#/4456739 - ERCC92.fa & ERCC92.gtf sequence and annotation files (.zip)

or using cellranger references to be consistent with the other annotations?

https://support.10xgenomics.com/single-cell-gene-expression/software/pipelines/latest/advanced/references

Cell Ranger provides pre-built human (hg19, GRCh38), mouse (mm10), and ercc92 reference packages for read alignment and gene expression quantification in cellranger count.

https://support.10xgenomics.com/single-cell-gene-expression/software/release-notes/build

ERCC reference dataset, ercc92
```
cellranger mkref --genome=ercc92 \
                 --fasta=ercc92.fa \
                 --genes=ercc92.gtf \
                 --ref-version=1.2.0
```

Author: This requires to install cellranger, I couldn't find a download link. 

---

The GTF has so much more information that's not needed. The txt file requires no parsing, so it's the easiest to maintain. Unless there's something programmatically advantageous about  the GTF, there's no need to use it and we should stick to the simpler txt file. Having the GTF file means that we need to process it slightly differently than the genes' GTFs because we only want IDs, and parsing the GTF would mean the creation of a file very similar to the text file

cellxgene requires ENSEMBL gene identifiers to ensure that all datasets it stores measure the same features and can therefore be integrated.

> The following gene annotation dependencies are *pinned* for this version of the schema. **Cells from any organism are allowed as long as orthologs from these annotations are used.**

Reviewer 3: Orthologs will not be a common use case. While it's an important note in the context of this update, I don't think it should be bolded because it will be relevant to a small subset of users. 

The _last_ thing we want is to encourage e.g. the fly community to map all their data to human orthologs so that they can publish on our platform. We would much prefer to add support for fly in a future update. These changes are only supported to enable cross species integration datasets. Jonah and @jahilton will need to be cautious about this. 

I suggest: 

```suggestion
The following gene annotation dependencies are *pinned* for this version of the schema. For multi-species experiments, cells from any organism are allowed as long as orthologs from the following species annotations are used.
```

Reviewer: For consistency with the metadata fields, I always use organism and not species.

Author: Changed

> The following gene annotation dependencies are *pinned* for this version of the schema. **Cells from any organism are allowed as long as orthologs from these annotations are used.**

Reviewer: I'm wondering whether this should be moved to the Requirements section where we state:

* **Organisms**. Data MUST be either Human or Mouse data. No other organisms are accepted by the cellxgene Data Portal.

Author: I think it would be would to clarify it this early. It's the first occurrence of a list of organisms, so it seems appropriate to let the user know that we are not restricting cells to only come from these organisms

> The following gene annotation dependencies are *pinned* for this version of the schema. For multi-species experiments, cells from any organism are allowed as long as orthologs from the following organism annotations are used.

Reviewer: multi-species -> multi-organism

Author: Fixed in 960ab161ad9d956b63075a4f3cca5c60d2badf2c

> | Organism | Required version | Download |

Reviewer 4: Has there been any consideration for spike-ins? We have come across a couple existing datasets that includes spike-ins.

Author: I had not thought about this and we should definitely consider it, we can either be strict and allow certain spike-ins although I'm afraid generalization may not be possible, or allow for a gene prefix (e.g. "SPIKE-IN-[...]")

|:--|:--|:--|
| [ENSEMBL (Human)] | Human reference GRCh38 (GENCODE v32/Ensembl 98)] matching [cellranger 2020-A (July 7, 2020) release] | [gencode.v32.primary_assembly.annotation.gtf] |
| [ENSEMBL (Mouse)] | Mouse reference mm10 (GENCODE vM23/Ensembl 98) matching [cellranger 2020-A (July 7, 2020) release]| [gencode.vM23.primary_assembly.annotation.gtf] |

> | [ENSEMBL (COVID-19)] | SARS-CoV-2 reference (ENSEBML assembly: ASM985889v3) | [Sars\_cov\_2.ASM985889v3.101.gtf.gz] |

Reviewer: (ENSEBML assembly: ASM985889v3) -> (**ENSEMBL** assembly: ASM985889v3)

Nit - but we should be consistent. I did not include the .gz in the label because I felt it was just "noise".

Author: fixed

> | [ENSEMBL (COVID-19)] | SARS-CoV-2 reference (ENSEBML assembly: ASM985889v3) | [Sars\_cov\_2.ASM985889v3.101.gtf] |

Reviewer: ENSEBML -> ENSEMBL

Author: Fixed

[cellranger 2020-A (July 7, 2020) release]: https://support.10xgenomics.com/single-cell-gene-expression/software/release-notes/build

> [ENSEMBL (COVID-19)]:https://covid-19.ensembl.org/index.html

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
[ENSEMBL (COVID-19)]: https://covid-19.ensembl.org/index.html
```

Author: fixed

    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>Value</th>

>         <td>categorical with <code>str</code> categories. If unavailable, this MUST be <code>"unknown"</code>.<br><br>If <code>organism_ontolology_term_id</code> <b>is not</b> <code>"NCBITaxon:9606"</code> (<i>Homo sapiens</i>) <br> <b>nor</b> <code>"NCBITaxon:10090"</code> (<i>Mus musculus</i>), this MUST be the most accurate child of <code>EFO:0000399</code>. <br><br>If <code>organism_ontolology_term_id</code> is <code>"NCBITaxon:9606"</code> for <i>Homo sapiens</i>, this MUST be the most<br>accurate HsapDv term with the following STRONGLY RECOMMENDED:

Reviewer: It would move this below the other requirements for Homo sapiens and Mus musculus. 

Otherwise, this MUST be the most accurate child of EFO:0000399.

    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>Value</th>

>         <td>categorical with <code>str</code> categories. This MUST be an NCBITaxon term.

Reviewer: ~~an~~ a NCBITaxon

Author: Fixed

When a dataset is uploaded, the cellxgene Data Portal MUST automatically add the matching human-readable name for the corresponding gene identifier to the `var` dataframe. Curators MUST NOT annotate the following column:

> ### feature_name

Reviewer: Good catch.

    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>Value</th>
        <td><code>str</code>. If the <code>feature_biotype</code> is <code>"gene"</code> then this this MUST be the human-readable ENSEMBL gene name assigned to the <code>feature_id</code>. If the <code>feature_biotype</code> is <code>"spike-in"</code> then this MUST the ERCC Spike-In identifier appended with <code>" spike-in control"</code>.
        </td>
    </tr>
</tbody></table>
<br>

### feature_reference

<table><tbody>
    <tr>
      <th>Key</th>
      <td>feature_reference</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>Annotator</th>
      <td>Data Portal</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>Value</th>

>         <td><code>str</code>. This MUST indicate the reference organism of genes and MUST be <code>NCBITaxon:9606</code> for <i>Homo sapiens</i>, <code>NCBITaxon:10090</code> for <i>Mus musculus</i>, or <code>NCBITaxon:2697049</code> for  SARS-CoV-2.

Reviewer 4: What's the instruction for the Portal if the feature is a spike-in? `ERCC`? `synthetic control`?

Reviewer: This also needs an **If the feature_biotype is "gene"** conditional. Do we need a value if the feature is a spike-in?

Reviewer: One possibility -  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/KC702166.1 indicates that it's _source organism_ is [_synthetic construct_](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Taxonomy/Browser/wwwtax.cgi?id=32630) or:

Taxonomy ID: 32630 (for references in articles please use NCBI:txid32630)

Reviewer: And that would fit with our use of NCBITaxon for the other cases.

Reviewer 3: I like the suggestion of NCBITaxon:32630 for a synthetic spike-in. 👍

Reviewer: Also _This must be the reference organism for ~~genes~~ features_ ... ?

Reviewer: See Table 1 in https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4978944/. 

Looking at the spike-in examples in more detail - there are three DNA sources. Syn and Bsub are both synthetic and Mjan is an exception. 

For example - 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/DQ516784

SOURCE      Methanocaldococcus jannaschii
  ORGANISM  Methanocaldococcus jannaschii

I still think that the proposed solution is a better approach than inventing another keyword.

Author: Agreed!

</tbody></table>
<br>

### feature_reference

<table><tbody>
    <tr>
      <th>Key</th>
      <td>feature_reference</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>Annotator</th>

>       <td>Data Portal</td>

Reviewer: Doesn't the curator set this?

Author: I added changes to address this

Reviewer: I might have added a _for example_, but I could add that in a later editorial update. I've seen a few things that I could address ... and I want to add a STRONGLY RECOMMENDED for unique titles for datasets per a side conversation with Jason.

    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>Value</th>

>         <td><code>str</code>. This MUST indicate the reference organism of genes, it MUST be <code>NCBITaxon:9606</code> for <i>Homo sapiens</i>, <code>NCBITaxon:10090</code> for <i>Mus musculus</i>, or <code>NCBITaxon:2697049</code> for  SARS-CoV-2.

Reviewer: This MUST indicate the reference organism of genes. It MUST be ...

Author: Fixed
